Draft - April newsletter (#4)
SciLifeLabBioImageInformaticsFacility/SciLifeLabBioImageInformaticsFacility.github.io: newsletters/_posts/2026-04-01-nl.md

Key aspects of the image analysis pipeline include:

• Fiducial particles detection in EM images using the template matching algorithm

• Fiducial particles detection in LM images using the Big-FISH Python package

• Finding correlation between EM and LM images using the Coherent Point Drift (CPD) registration 

Explore the code [here](https://github.com/ai4life-opencalls/oc_2_project_26)

If you have similar microscopy images or any image analysis questions feel free to reach us at biif@scilifelab.se or submit your project requests at https://nbis.se/services/bioimage-informatics. See more of our work on the [BIIF projects page](https://biifsweden.github.io/).

# Publication highlight 

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/BIIFSweden/BIIFSweden.github.io/blob/NewsletterBranch/images/newsletter/2026_04/2023-03-28-DanAndersson2023-1.png?raw=true" width="500" alt="Project image">
</p>

> **Jonas Windhager** from the BIIF team supported a study utilizing a novel droplet microfluidics method to detect rare resistant E. coli subpopulations in bloodstream infections, addressing the clinical challenge of antibiotic heteroresistance. He developed a custom computational pipeline in Python to automate the analysis of time-lapse microscopy. By leveraging tunable image segmentation algorithms to quantify droplet shrinkage, the method successfully identified resistant cells at frequencies as low as 10<sup>-6</sup>, demonstrating a robust, high-throughput approach for improved diagnostic sensitivity.

Reviewer: FYI, there is currently another paper in the pipeline (first round of reviews done, revision submitted in February), where the work was shared between @acorbat and me. Perhaps we should add a "stay tuned for further updates soon" or something?

Author: Thanks Jonas! Yes, I will eventually replace the github links with biifsweden.github.io links before sending it out
It is a very good suggestion to highlight the tools :) I have incorporated the suggestions.

> Interested in the image analysis pipeline? Check out the [code](https://github.com/BIIFSweden/DropletHR)

Reviewer: Since the repository has also been used for the upcoming paper, I would instead link to the version used for the first one:

https://github.com/BIIFSweden/DropletHR/tree/v0.2.0

Alternatively, directly link to the Zenodo release:

```suggestion
Interested in the image analysis pipeline? Check out the [code](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15263384)
```

# Pre-Focus on Microscopy (FOM) discussion

We were delighted to host Dr. Oliver Biehlmaier and Dr. Alexia Loynton-Ferrand from the University of Basel. The visit included fruitful discussions on image analysis infrastructure, smart microscopy, and the tools used at our respective facilities.

# Upcoming events

### **GloBIAS seminar**

As part of the Global BioImage Analysts' Society (GloBIAS) seminar series, Nicholas Condon from the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, UQ, Australia will be speaking about "Big data infrastructure strategies for image analysis in a core facility" on 1st April, 2026 at 13:00 CEST.

Register [here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeJru9DcVQc65rzFxU7jd88q9ZfiNWl7uGQ5Dll6UepdkuR9A/viewform)

### **Image data community days 2026**

Euro-Bioimaging is organizing Image Data Community Days from 13-17th April, 2026 with a list of lectures, hands-on workshops and networking sessions focussed on image data. 

> Don't miss **Jonas Windhager** presenting the new version of TissUUmaps in his talk "TissUUmaps 4: Facilitating Community Contributions to Spatial Biology Visualization" on 15th April, 2026 at 09:40 - 10:05 CET. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't miss **Jonas Windhager** giving an update on the next major release of TissUUmaps in his talk "TissUUmaps 4: Facilitating Community Contributions to Spatial Biology Visualization" on 15th April, 2026 at 09:40 - 10:05 CET. 
```

Register [here](https://www.eurobioimaging.eu/events/image-data-community-days-2026/)

### **MIMER AI factory plenary kickoff** 

Interested in using AI for research? Curious about how AI is being applied in life sciences and other domains? This [event](https://nextcloud.naiss.se/apps/forms/s/jwPj4RW2o7425r5XY4nZeado) might be for you.

Register by **15th April**, 2026

### **19th OME Community Meeting**

> Open Microscopy Environment (OME) Community Meeting will be held at Düsseldorf from 28-30th April, 2026. Register [here](https://gerbi-gmb.de/machform/view.php?id=100870) if you would like to hear from the OME community. 

Reviewer: The event has been fully booked for a while already. There is a waiting list and hybrid participation is possible, but I'd link to https://gerbi-gmb.de/event/ome-2026-community-meeting/ for that information instead.

Author: Good to know! I have added the suggested link.
